:point_left: [Come back to index](README.md)

# Chicago Python User Group(ChiPy) Code of Conduct

## Report handling procedure

This document aims to present the way ChiPy handles received reports. This is
not a complete guide, but a set of guidelines and best practices that guide the
way we provide support to the community. Each issue is different and requires
individual consideration on a case-to-case basis.

### How we receive reports

All reports received by us are usually sent to the
[chipy.conduct@gmail.com](mailto:chipy.conduct@gmail.com) email address
that is automatically forwarded to the on-call receivers of complaints.

It is possible for an individual to receive a report individually via email,
Slack or in-person. They should be responsible for summarizing and emailing the
central email account where possible (i.e. there is no conflict of interest).

### Privacy

Throughout the process we intend to keep confidential any information on the
reporter or subject of the report as information is gathered. If necessary, we
may need to share identity or activity information more broadly. In that case
we will pursue every avenue to alert the affected persons prior to the release
and ensure any information is shared in a limited and effective way. An ideal
resolution has an effective and mutually agreed upon remediation(for the
organization and the reporter) while ensuring maximum privacy and discretion.

### On-call duty

In order to achieve a fast response time to received reports, we implement a
month long on-call duty that is rotated between members of the Conduct
Committee. On the first meeting of each month, we assign one member to be the
primary person on duty and another member to be a secondary supporter. The
committe roster and the schedule is managed via [On Call
Roster](http://www.chipy.org/pages/conduct-on-call/).

**Primary person on duty** is responsible for providing the initial response to
 a reporter, ideally within half a day. They're also responsible for either
 shepherding the received issue, or finding another member of the committee who
  will commit to shepherding it.

**Secondary person on duty** inherits the responsibilities of the primary person
 if they're not available.

If all else fails, any member of the committee can step in and pick up an issue
 if they see that response hasn't been provided within a first day.

### Initial response

We aim to provide the initial response and acknowledgement of the received
report ideally within couple of hours, or half a day.

If the response requires a decision, we should send an acknowledgement of the
report (and carbon-copy the main address) to make sure the report is informed
we're working on it, and not ignoring it:

> Hi X,

> Thank you so much for reporting this issue to the ChiPy Code of Conduct
Committee. I appreciate you taking the time to get in touch - reports like this
help us to make ChiPy a better community.

> We'll discuss and get back to you with the outcome, and will keep this report
on file. Meanwhile, if there is anything else we can do to help or support you,
please do let us know.

> Regards, > [First_name Last_name] > ChiPy Code of Conduct Committee

If the received report clearly states that the action has been taken already,
and the issue is only reported to be kept on file in our central log, the
committee can close the issue by sending a simple acknowledgement:

> Hi [X],

> Thank you so much for reporting this issue to the ChiPy Code of Conduct
Committee. I appreciate you taking the time to get in touch - reports like this
help us to make ChiPy a better community. The action you've taken so far seems
appropriate, and I'd like to thank you for handling the issue with care.

> We're going to keep this report on file to look for patterns in the future
across the community. If there is anything else we can do to help or support
you, please do let us know.

> Thank you again!

> Regards, > [First Last name] > ChiPy Code of Conduct Committee

The first responder should also add a record of the report in our files.

### Resolving the report

We aim to resolve any report received within two-weeks.

#### Assign a shepherd

In order to resolve reports timely and efficiently, we use "shepherding", a
practice of assigning a member of the committee to "own" an issue from the
initial report until it is resolved. The shepherd does not have to be the
person who is on duty that week. A member can suggest themselves as a shepherd
for an issue, but must take into consideration:

- **Biases** - If the shepherd has any bias towards the issue (such as knowing
the people involved in the issue), then the shepherd should make these biases
known to the rest of the committee immediately. Whether or not the bias may
affect the outcome of the issue should be discussed by the committee, and a new
shepherd should be picked if this is the case.

- **Time** - Handling issues is very important, the shepherd should be aware
that resolving the issue is a high priority. It is the responsibility of the
shepherd to see that each stage of the process is acted upon in a timely
manner, and any delays be addressed. If the shepherd is busy for reasons
outside of the committee, they need to alert the rest of the committee of this.
If there is a delay during the process due to some external reason, it is the
responsibility of the shepherd to alert the committee of this delay.

When a shepherd is assigned, if it is different to the initial responder, the
initial responder should send an update:

 > Dear [X],

> I'm writing regarding your recent report to the ChiPy Code of Conduct
Committee. I wanted to let you know that we have assigned the case to [Y], who
will be your main point of contact going forward. [Y]'s email address is
[E]. If you have any questions or concerns with this, please
let me know.

> Regards, > [First Last name] > ChiPy Code of Conduct Committee

Assuming no questions or concerns, this is marks the completion of the initial
responder's responsibilities for this case. If the reporter does have concerns
or questions, the first responder should ask the committee to resolve these.

#### Decision-making process

The process with which decisions are made differ slightly between issues, due
to the fact that each issue is slightly different. However, there is a loosely
defined set of stages that are present in each issue.

- **Shepherd nomination** - The committee decides on a shepherd for the issue.
- **Contacting the reporter** - The shepherd should contact the report letting
them know they are the point of contact between the reporter and the committee,
and will be available for the reporter if they have any questions. Based on the
initial report, the shepherd may choose to ask for more information about the
report at this time.
- **Initial discussion** - The committee conducts a discussion into the report
in order to understand the issue. During this time, the committee should aim to
 decide the severity of the issue and the appropriate next steps. This could be:

    - Contacting the reporter for additional information.
    - Researching the issue if there is additional evidence online or in written
    form.
    - Contacting additional persons involved in the report.
    - Contacting any official bodies (such as the Django Software Foundation or
      Python Software Foundation) if the committee feels they can provide extra
      information.
    - Seeking legal advice.

Regardless of the actual steps taken at this stage, the aim is the gather a
clear understanding of the issue, what occurred, who is involved, and what is
the severity of the issue.

- **Deciding actions** - Based on the evidence, the shepherd should propose to
the committee the actions that should be taken to resolve the issue. The
shepherd requires at least two members of the committee to agree on these
actions. If the issue is severe enough to warrant group-level action (such as a
ban from future events or removal from electronic services or legal action),
the committee is responsible for providing a confidential report to the ChiPy
Organizers and initiate a motion for the intended action.

### After decisions are made

Once the committee has made its decision, the following takes place:

 - **Carrying out actions** - The shepherd performs or delegates the actions
agreed upon by the committee, the first of which should be to inform the
reporter of the decision made by the committee. The actions can sometimes
involve contacting individuals involved in the issue. For these actions, we
recommend the shepherd write a draft and share it with the committee before it
is sent to the individual in order to check that necessary information is
conveyed clearly and objectively.

 - **Ongoing actions** - As a result of conducting the actions, the issue may
not resolve straight away.  Based on further developments, the shepherd should
continue to share the developments and work with the committee to decide on the
actions that need to be taken in response.

- **Resolving** - Once the actions are implemented and the issue feels resolved,
it is the responsibility of the shepherd to:
  * contact the reporter about the final resolution, and that the committee
	 considers the case closed until new information comes to light.
  * inform the committee that the issue is considered resolved
  * update the reports file with a summary of:
  * actions taken
  * outcome
  * review date

If the issue was already resolved by local representatives handling Code
of Conduct issue, our committee doesn't carry the responsibility of informing
the subject of the report that the record will be kept by us unless there is a
clear reason why we would like to follow up to find out their side of the story.

## Flowchart

![Report handling flowchart](./report-handling-flowchart.svg)

## Source Shoutout

This guide was borrowed almost-entirely from the excellent Django Code of
Conduct [Report Handling
Procedure](https://github.com/django/code-of-conduct/blob/master/reports.md).
We remain extemely grateful for their thorough, transparent example.
